Introduction To Background Processing

What is Background Processing?
Background processing means running tasks separately from your main application flow, so users don't have to wait for
long-running operations to complete.
Think of it like:
- Ordering food at a restaurant - you don't stand at the counter watching them cook
-You get a receipt, sit down, and they bring it when ready
Right now, when a user uploads a PDF document, what needs to happen?
- Extract text, tables, images from PDF (using the unstructured library)
- Form Chunks
- Generate AI summaries for chunks
- Create embeddings (1536 dimensions per chunk)
-Store in PostGreSQL database

When Do You Need Background Processing?
✓ Slow (> 5 seconds)
✓ CPU/Memory intensive
✓ Can fail and need retry
✓ Can be done later
✓ Independent from user's immediate action
Because it takes >1 minutes to process a PDF in our application, we will have to resort to background processing.
We will use Celery for background processing in this course.

Why Celery?
Most popular Python task queue (battle-tested, production-ready)
Works seamlessly with FastAPI
Handles retries, failures, and task scheduling automatically
Easy to monitor and debug
Scales from 1 worker to 1000+ workers

Redis:
Redis is like a super-fast notepad that lives in your computer's memory (RAM). "user_123_status" "processing"
"task_456_result" "complete"
Think of it as a simple database that stores key-value pairs:
Why is it fast? Because it keeps everything in RAM (not on disk), so reading/writing is nearly instant.
Common Redis use-cases:
- Caching (storing frequently accessed data)
- Message queue (passing messages between programs)
- Real-time counters

Celery:
Celery is a task queue system. It helps you run tasks in the background.
Think of it like a restaurant kitchen:
- Waiter (fastapi): Takes orders from users
- Order tickets (Redis): The board where orders are posted
- Kitchen (Celery workers): Cooks the food in the background
The waiter(FastAPI) doesn't cook - they just take the order, hang it on the board (Redis), and continue serving other customers. The
kitchen picks up orders from the board and processes them.

How They Work Together:
1. Browser uploads file to S3 directly 

task_data = {
"task": "process_document"
"args": [file_path],
"id": "abc-123-def"}

2. Once done, browser notifies FastAPI that upload is completed and ready to be processed 
3. FastAPI creates a brand new task 
4. Task goes into Redis → Redis stores this task in a queue
5. Celery starts processing tasks one by one → Takes as long as needed (user isn't waiting)
6. Results are stored in our PostGreSQL DB
Summary:
- Celery is the executor of the tasks
- Redis provides a queue data structure that is perfect for storing tasks to be taken up. This can be thought of as the middleman or the
broker between fastapi and celery
- As soon as a celery worker finishes with a task, the result can be stored either in redis itself or postgres

1. Does Celery only work with Redis?
No! Celery supports multiple brokers:
> -- Redis (most popular, simple)
- RabbitMQ
- Amazon SQS (simple queue service)
- Apache Kafka
2. How does Celery know how to work with Redis and other brokers?
Celery internally uses the redis-py library to connect to Redis.
You don't need to write any Redis code yourself - Celery handles it all.
3. How many tasks can run simultaneously?
It depends on your CPU cores. Each core can run one CPU-intensive task at full speed.
Example:
10-core CPU → Set --concurrency=10 → 10 tasks run in parallel
Each task gets its own core for maximum performance
If you have 100 tasks but only 10 cores, the first 10 run immediately while the other 90 wait in the Redis queue.
4. What if load exceeds one server's capacity?
Scale horizontally! Deploy Celery workers on multiple 16-core CPU servers, all connected to the same Redis queue.
- Server 1 (16 cores): 16 workers
- Server 2 (16 cores): 16 workers
- Server 3 (16 cores): 16 workers
Now 48 tasks run simultaneously instead of 16. Add as many servers as needed - the architecture scales from 1 machine to 100+ machines
seamlessly. We can also dynamically add and remove servers based on load.

Redis:
Quick note before we install: Redis is not a Python package - it's a separate service that needs to run on its own.
Think of it like PostgreSQL or any other database server.
When we deploy this to production later, we'll use a managed service like AWS ElastiCache or Redis Cloud. But for development, we'll
run Redis locally on our machine.
Installation depends on what OS you're using:
MacOS:
brew install redis
Ubuntu:
sudo apt update
sudo apt install redis-server
Windows (WSL):
sudo apt install redis-server

 "redis-server" - to start the server

 "celery -A tasks worker --loglevel=info --pool=threads" - to start the celery task